doc: add design doc for RBD QoS (#4089)
ceph/ceph-csi: docs/design/proposals/rbd-qos.md

> # Design Doc for RBD QOS using cgroup v2

Reviewer: QoS is probably the more common abbreviation?

 259        1       1024 nvme0n1p1
 259        2     130048 nvme0n1p2
 259        3     393216 nvme0n1p3
 259        4  125303791 nvme0n1p4
 259        6   52428800 nvme2n1
   7        0  536870912 loop0
 259        5  536870912 nvme1n1
 252        0   52428800 rbd0
sh-5.1#
```

Once the rbd device is mapped on the node we get the device's major and minor
number we need to set the io limit on the device but we need to find the right
cgroup file where we need to set the limit

Kubernetes/Openshift creates a custom cgroup hierarchy for the pods it created
but start is `sys/fs/cgroup`  folder

```bash
sh-5.1# cd /sys/fs/cgroup/
sh-5.1# ls
cgroup.controllers cgroup.subtree_control cpuset.mems.effective  io.stat   memory.reclaim   sys-kernel-debug.mount
cgroup.max.depth cgroup.threads  dev-hugepages.mount    kubepods.slice  memory.stat   sys-kernel-tracing.mount
cgroup.max.descendants cpu.pressure  dev-mqueue.mount       machine.slice  misc.capacity   system.slice
cgroup.procs  cpu.stat  init.scope        memory.numa_stat  sys-fs-fuse-connections.mount user.slice
cgroup.stat  cpuset.cpus.effective io.pressure        memory.pressure  sys-kernel-config.mount
```

> `kubepods.slice`` is the starting point and it contains multiple hierarchy

Reviewer: one ` too many

To identify the right cgroup file, we need pod UUID and container UUID from the
`pod yaml` output

```bash
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep uid
  uid: cdf7b785-4eb7-44f7-99cc-ef53890f4dfd
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i containerID
  - containerID: cri-o://77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i qosClass
  qosClass: BestEffort
```

Now check in the besteffor.slice and identify the right path using pod UID and
container UID

Before that check `io.max` on the application pod and see if there is any limit

```bash
[$]kubectl exec -it csi-rbd-demo-pod -- sh
sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
sh-4.4#
```

Come back to the Node and find the right cgroup scope

```bash
sh-5.1# cd kubepods-besteffort.slice/kubepods-besteffort-podcdf7b785_4eb7_44f7_99cc_ef53890f4dfd.slice/crio-77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9.scope/

sh-5.1# echo "252:0 wbps=1048576" > io.max
sh-5.1# cat io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
```

Now go back to the application pod and check if we have the right limit set

```bash

> [$]oc exec: oc exec -it csi-rbd-demo-pod -- sh

Reviewer: use `kubectl` examples?

sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
sh-4.4#
```

Note:- We can only support the QOS that cgroup v2 io controller supports.

Below are the configurations that will be supported

|  Parameter     |  Description     |
|  ---  |  ---  |

> |  MaxReadIOOperationsPerSecond     | Max read IO operations per second      |

Reviewer: just use IOPS, that is common enough, IOOperationsPerSecond sounds very weird.

|  MaxReadIOOperationsPerSecond     | Max write IO operations per second      |
|  MaxReadBytesPerSecond     |  Max read bytes per second     |
|  MaxWriteBytesPerSecond     |  Max write bytes per second     |

## Different approaches

> The above solution can be implemented in CephCSI using 3 different approaches.

Reviewer: the name of the project is Ceph-CSI :wink:

Author: removed it now :D

1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublish Volume RPC
1. During NodePublishVolume operation
   * Retrieve the QOS configuration from the volumeContext in NodePublishRequest
   * Identify the rbd device using the NodeStageVolumePath
   * Get the pod UUID from the NodeStageVolume
   * Set io.max file in all the containers in the pod

#### Drawbacks of StorageClass QOS

1. No way to update the QOS at runtime
1. Need to take a backup and restore to New QOS StorageClass
1. Delete and Recreate the PV object

### Add support for VolumeAttributeClass

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: silver
parameters:
  MaxReadIOOperationsPerSecond: ""
  MaxWriteIOOperationsPerSecond: ""
  MaxReadBytesPerSecond: ""
  MaxWriteBytesPerSecond: ""
```

VolumeAttributesClassName is a new parameter in the PVC object the user can
choose from and this can also be updated or removed later.

This new VolumeAttributeClass is designed to keep storage that supports setting
QOS at the storage level which means setting some configuration at the storage
(like QOS for nbd)

#### Implementation of VolumeAttributeClass QOS

> 1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublish Volume RPC

Reviewer: maybe: ... `NodePublishVolume` CSI procedure.

> 1. Add support in cephCSI to expose ModifyVolume RPC

Reviewer: cephCSI -> Ceph-CSI

1. CephCSI will store QOS in the rbd image metadata
1. During NodeStage operation retrieve the image metadata and store it in
   stagingPath
1. Whenever a new pod comes in apply the QOS

#### Drawbacks of VolumeAttributeClass QOS

One problem with above is all application need to be scaled downed and scaled
up to get the new QOS value even though its changed in the PVC object, this is
sometime impossible as it will have downtime.

### VolumeAttributeClass with NodePublish Secret

> 1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublish Volume

Reviewer: maybe: ... `NodePublishVolume` CSI procedure.

> 1. Add support in cephCSI to expose ModifyVolumeRPC call

Reviewer: maybe: ... `ModifyVolume` CSI procedure.

1. CephCSI will store QOS in the rbd image metadata

> 1. During NodePublish operation retrieve the QOS from image metadata

Reviewer: `NodePublishVolume`

1. Whenever a new pod comes in apply the QOS

This solution addresses the aforementioned issue, but it requires a secret to
communicate with the ceph cluster. Therefore, we must create a new
PublishSecret for the storageClass, which may be beneficial when Kubernetes
eventually enables Node operations.

Both options 2 and 3 are contingent upon changes to the CSI spec and Kubernetes
support. Additionally, VolumeAttributeClass is currently being developed within

> the Kubernetes realm and will initially be in the Alpha stage. Consequently, it

Reviewer: add inline link to the KEP please

will be disabled by default, but it does offer the following advantages.

1. No Restore/Clone operation is required to change the QOS
1. Easily QOS can be changed for existing PVC only with second approach not
   with third as it needs new secret.

#### Hybrid Approach

Considering the advantages and drawbacks, we can use StorageClass and
VolumeAttributeClass to support QoS, with VolumeAttributeClass taking

> precedence over StorageClass.

Reviewer: Did you consider adding something like `VolumeAttributeClass` to CSI-Addons? That would allow changing the parameters similar to `ModifyVolume` already.

Author: @nixpanic not as of today as kubernetes is working on it, if not we can look for adding it in future

Reviewer: I've now checked the KEP and it seems to have noted Alpha status for Kubernetes 1.28. I am not sure implementing additional custom parameters in the StorageClass is the right approach if the feature lands in Kubernetes  soon. Having the parameters in the StorageClass means maintaining support for at least 2 configuration directives, which adds work on the testing and maintenance.

Ideally we only need to implement and maintain the `VolumeAttributeClass` CSI procedures that Kubernetes is implementing.  A single standard mechanism benefits us as well as Ceph-CSI users. Putting efforts in getting the Kubernetes work done is important, and if the Ceph-CSI contributors can assists with that, all the better!

Author: @nixpanic this is deferred for Kubernetes 1.29 https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3751#issuecomment-1640690606 and am not sure it will happen (hope it will happen), and as it goes with Alpha, Beta Feature cycle it takes more time for users to use this in production and not everyone will agree to upgrade to latest kubernetes for this one. I think it better to have both solutions and IMO it is not a maintenance and testing burden for this one as its minimal one, later once VolumeAttributeClass is stable we can deprecate the support for storageclass Qos.

Reviewer 2: > @nixpanic this is deferred for Kubernetes 1.29 [kubernetes/enhancements#3751 (comment)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3751#issuecomment-1640690606) and am not sure it will happen (hope it will happen), and as it goes with Alpha, Beta Feature cycle it takes more time for users to use this in production and not everyone will agree to upgrade to latest kubernetes for this one. I think it better to have both solutions and IMO it is not a maintenance and testing burden for this one as its minimal one, later once VolumeAttributeClass is stable we can deprecate the support for storageclass Qos.

+1

### Conclusion

The RBD QOS design aims to mitigate IO noisy neighbor issues in Ceph
deployments by providing a way to set I/O limits on devices through cgroupv2
for both krbd and rbd-nbd mapped devices. Different approaches involving
StorageClass and VolumeAttributesClass have been discussed, each with its own
advantages and drawbacks. The hybrid approach offers a flexible solution that
accounts for dynamic changes while addressing the challenges of existing
approaches.

### References

> * <https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/>

Reviewer: please link with a subject/description of what is at the URL

Author: @nixpanic any specific format you are looking at, provide a suggestion.

Reviewer: something like

```markdown
* [Kubernetes cgroup v2 Architecture](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/)
```

cgroup.kill  cpuset.mems    io.max        memory.swap.current
cgroup.max.depth cpuset.mems.effective   io.pressure        memory.swap.events
cgroup.max.descendants hugetlb.1GB.current   io.stat        memory.swap.high
cgroup.procs  hugetlb.1GB.events   kubepods-besteffort.slice      memory.swap.max
cgroup.stat  hugetlb.1GB.events.local  kubepods-burstable.slice      memory.zswap.current
cgroup.subtree_control hugetlb.1GB.max    kubepods-pod2b38830b_c2d6_4528_8935_b1c08511b1e3.slice  memory.zswap.max
cgroup.threads  hugetlb.1GB.numa_stat   memory.current       misc.current
cgroup.type  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.current  memory.events        misc.max
cpu.idle  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.max   memory.events.local       pids.current
cpu.max   hugetlb.2MB.current   memory.high        pids.events
cpu.max.burst  hugetlb.2MB.events   memory.low        pids.max
cpu.pressure  hugetlb.2MB.events.local  memory.max        rdma.current
cpu.stat  hugetlb.2MB.max    memory.min        rdma.max
cpu.weight  hugetlb.2MB.numa_stat   memory.numa_stat
cpu.weight.nice  hugetlb.2MB.rsvd.current  memory.oom.group
```

Based on the QoS of the pod, either our application pod will end up in the

> above `kubepods-besteffort.slice` or `kubepods-besteffort.slice` or

Reviewer 3: One of these used to be burstable ;)
```suggestion
above `kubepods-besteffort.slice` or `kubepods-burstable.slice` or
```

Author: copy paste mistake, fixed it

   procedure
1. Add support in Ceph-CSI to expose ModifyVolume CSI procedure
1. Ceph-CSI will store QoS in the rbd image metadata
1. During NodePublishVolume operation retrieve the QoS from image metadata
1. Whenever a new pod comes in apply the QoS

This solution addresses the aforementioned issue, but it requires a secret to
communicate with the ceph cluster. Therefore, we must create a new
PublishSecret for the storageClass, which may be beneficial when Kubernetes
eventually enables Node operations.

Both options 2 and 3 are contingent upon changes to the CSI spec and Kubernetes
support. Additionally,
[VolumeAttributeClass](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-attributes-class/README.md)
is currently being developed within the Kubernetes realm and will initially be
in the Alpha stage. Consequently, it will be disabled by default.

#### Advantages of QoS using VolumeAttributeClass

1. No Restore/Clone operation is required to change the QoS
1. Easily QoS can be changed for existing PVC only with second approach not
   with third as it needs new secret.

### Hybrid Approach

> Considering the advantages and drawbacks, we can use StorageClass and

Reviewer 4: Is it possible for users to override the QoS in the storage class with the VolumeAttributeClass settings? This sounds good assuming the admin controls which VolumeAttributeClass is available for the user to specify in their PVC. Otherwise, the user could override admin settings in the storage class.

Author: both storageclass and VolumeAttributeClass are admin created ones and the user will not have access to create one, Yes users can update the VolumeAttributeClass in the PVC later creation but he/she should get the name of the VolumeAttributeClass from the admin.

sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
sh-4.4#
```

Come back to the Node and find the right cgroup scope

```bash
sh-5.1# cd kubepods-besteffort.slice/kubepods-besteffort-podcdf7b785_4eb7_44f7_99cc_ef53890f4dfd.slice/crio-77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9.scope/

sh-5.1# echo "252:0 wbps=1048576" > io.max
sh-5.1# cat io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
```

Now go back to the application pod and check if we have the right limit set

```bash
[$]kubectl exec -it csi-rbd-demo-pod -- sh
sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
sh-4.4#
```

Note:- We can only support the QoS that cgroup v2 io controller supports.

Below are the configurations that will be supported

|  Parameter     |  Description     |
|  ---  |  ---  |
|  MaxReadIOPS     | Max read IO operations per second      |
|  MaxWriteIOPS     | Max write IO operations per second      |
|  MaxReadBytesPerSecond     |  Max read bytes per second     |
|  MaxWriteBytesPerSecond     |  Max write bytes per second     |

## Different approaches

The above solution can be implemented using 3 different approaches.

> ### QoS using new parameters in RBD StorageClass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. QoS using new parameters in RBD StorageClass
```

```yaml
---
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
   name: csi-rbd-sc
provisioner: rbd.csi.ceph.com
parameters:
  MaxReadIOPS: ""
  MaxWriteIOPS: ""
  MaxReadBytesPerSecond: ""
  MaxWriteBytesPerSecond: ""
```

#### Implementation for StorageClass QoS

1. Create new storageClass with new parameters for QoS
1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublishVolume CSI
   procedure
1. During NodePublishVolume CSI procedure
   * Retrieve the QoS configuration from the volumeContext in NodePublishRequest
   * Identify the rbd device using the NodeStageVolumePath
   * Get the pod UUID from the NodeStageVolume
   * Set io.max file in all the containers in the pod

#### Drawbacks of StorageClass QoS

1. No way to update the QoS at runtime
1. Need to take a backup and restore to New QoS StorageClass
1. Delete and Recreate the PV object

> ### Add support for VolumeAttributeClass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 2. QoS using parameters in VolumeAttributeClass
```

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: silver
parameters:
  MaxReadIOPS: ""
  MaxWriteIOPS: ""
  MaxReadBytesPerSecond: ""
  MaxWriteBytesPerSecond: ""
```

VolumeAttributesClassName is a new parameter in the PVC object the user can
choose from and this can also be updated or removed later.

This new VolumeAttributeClass is designed to keep storage that supports setting
QoS at the storage level which means setting some configuration at the storage
(like QoS for nbd)

#### Implementation of VolumeAttributeClass QoS

1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublishVolume CSI
   procedure
1. Add support in Ceph-CSI to expose ModifyVolume CSI procedure
1. Ceph-CSI will store QoS in the rbd image metadata
1. During NodeStage operation retrieve the image metadata and store it in
   stagingPath
1. Whenever a new pod comes in apply the QoS

#### Drawbacks of VolumeAttributeClass QoS

One problem with above is all application need to be scaled downed and scaled
up to get the new QoS value even though its changed in the PVC object, this is
sometime impossible as it will have downtime.

> ### VolumeAttributeClass with NodePublish Secret

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 3. QoS using parameters in VolumeAttributeClass with NodePublish Secret
```

1. Modify CSIDriver object to pass pod details to the NodePublishVolume CSI
   procedure
1. Add support in Ceph-CSI to expose ModifyVolume CSI procedure
1. Ceph-CSI will store QoS in the rbd image metadata
1. During NodePublishVolume operation retrieve the QoS from image metadata
1. Whenever a new pod comes in apply the QoS

This solution addresses the aforementioned issue, but it requires a secret to
communicate with the ceph cluster. Therefore, we must create a new
PublishSecret for the storageClass, which may be beneficial when Kubernetes
eventually enables Node operations.

> Both options 2 and 3 are contingent upon changes to the CSI spec and Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: Adding number to option will help differentiating the different options we have. 
It was a bit confusing to differentiate the option using only font size.

support. Additionally,

> [VolumeAttributeClass](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3780) is

Reviewer: a link to the actual doc is probably easier for people to read https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-attributes-class/README.md

is currently being developed within the Kubernetes realm and will initially be

> in the Alpha stage. Consequently, it will be disabled by default, but it does
> offer the following advantages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the Alpha stage. Consequently, it will be disabled by default.

#### Advantages of QoS using VolumeAttributeClass
```

Let's highlight by adding another heading here.

cgroup.kill  cpuset.mems    io.max        memory.swap.current
cgroup.max.depth cpuset.mems.effective   io.pressure        memory.swap.events
cgroup.max.descendants hugetlb.1GB.current   io.stat        memory.swap.high
cgroup.procs  hugetlb.1GB.events   kubepods-besteffort.slice      memory.swap.max
cgroup.stat  hugetlb.1GB.events.local  kubepods-burstable.slice      memory.zswap.current
cgroup.subtree_control hugetlb.1GB.max    kubepods-pod2b38830b_c2d6_4528_8935_b1c08511b1e3.slice  memory.zswap.max
cgroup.threads  hugetlb.1GB.numa_stat   memory.current       misc.current
cgroup.type  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.current  memory.events        misc.max
cpu.idle  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.max   memory.events.local       pids.current
cpu.max   hugetlb.2MB.current   memory.high        pids.events
cpu.max.burst  hugetlb.2MB.events   memory.low        pids.max
cpu.pressure  hugetlb.2MB.events.local  memory.max        rdma.current
cpu.stat  hugetlb.2MB.max    memory.min        rdma.max
cpu.weight  hugetlb.2MB.numa_stat   memory.numa_stat
cpu.weight.nice  hugetlb.2MB.rsvd.current  memory.oom.group
```

Based on the QoS of the pod, either our application pod will end up in the

> above besteffort.slice or burstable.slice cgroup or Guaranteed cgroup, The 3

Reviewer 3: So for `Burstable` and `BestEffort`, a scope under `kubepods-burstable.slice` and `kubepods-besteffort.slice` would be adjusted.  How would `Guaranteed` be handled?

Author: `Guaranteed` will end up in the `kubepods.slice` itself, like `kubepodspod2b38830b_c2d6_4528_8935_b1c08511b1e3.slice` pod here.

> QoS class is defined

Reviewer 3: Nit: "QoS classes are defined ...".  Also you probably meant to have a dot instead of comma above.

[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep uid
  uid: cdf7b785-4eb7-44f7-99cc-ef53890f4dfd
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i containerID
  - containerID: cri-o://77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i qosClass
  qosClass: BestEffort
```

Now check in the besteffor.slice and identify the right path using pod UID and
container UID

Before that check `io.max` on the application pod and see if there is any limit

```bash
[$]kubectl exec -it csi-rbd-demo-pod -- sh
sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
sh-4.4#
```

Come back to the Node and find the right cgroup scope

```bash
sh-5.1# cd kubepods-besteffort.slice/kubepods-besteffort-podcdf7b785_4eb7_44f7_99cc_ef53890f4dfd.slice/crio-77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9.scope/

sh-5.1# echo "252:0 wbps=1048576" > io.max
sh-5.1# cat io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
```

Now go back to the application pod and check if we have the right limit set

```bash
[$]kubectl exec -it csi-rbd-demo-pod -- sh
sh-4.4# cat /sys/fs/cgroup/io.max
252:0 rbps=max wbps=1048576 riops=max wiops=max
sh-4.4#
```

> Note:- We can only support the QoS that cgroup v2 io controller supports.

Reviewer 3: Probably worth calling out that this means that cumulative read+write QoS limits won't be supported.

# Design Doc for RBD QoS using cgroup v2

## Introduction

The RBD QoS (Quality of Service) design aims to address the issue of IO noisy
neighbor problems encountered in early Ceph deployments catering to OpenStack
environments. These problems were effectively managed by implementing QEMU
throttling at the virtio-blk/scsi level. To further enhance this,

> capacity-based IOPs were introduced, providing a more dynamic experience

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
capacity-based IOPS were introduced, providing a more dynamic experience
```

To mitigate resource starvation issues, setting QoS at the device level through
cgroup v2 when enabled becomes crucial. This approach guarantees that I/O
capacity isn't overcommitted and is fairly distributed among workloads.

## Dependency

* cgroup v2 must be enabled on the Node
* We might have Kubernetes dependency as well
* Container runtime dependency that supports cgroupv2

## Manual steps for implementing RBD QoS in a Kubernetes Cluster

```bash
[$] ssh root@node1
sh-4.4# chroot /host
sh-5.1# cat /proc/partitions
major minor  #blocks  name

 259        0  125829120 nvme0n1
 259        1       1024 nvme0n1p1
 259        2     130048 nvme0n1p2
 259        3     393216 nvme0n1p3
 259        4  125303791 nvme0n1p4
 259        6   52428800 nvme2n1
   7        0  536870912 loop0
 259        5  536870912 nvme1n1
 252        0   52428800 rbd0
sh-5.1#
```

Once the rbd device is mapped on the node we get the device's major and minor
number we need to set the io limit on the device but we need to find the right
cgroup file where we need to set the limit

Kubernetes/Openshift creates a custom cgroup hierarchy for the pods it created

> but start is `sys/fs/cgroup`  folder

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but start is `/sys/fs/cgroup`  folder
```

```bash
sh-5.1# cd /sys/fs/cgroup/
sh-5.1# ls
cgroup.controllers cgroup.subtree_control cpuset.mems.effective  io.stat   memory.reclaim   sys-kernel-debug.mount
cgroup.max.depth cgroup.threads  dev-hugepages.mount    kubepods.slice  memory.stat   sys-kernel-tracing.mount
cgroup.max.descendants cpu.pressure  dev-mqueue.mount       machine.slice  misc.capacity   system.slice
cgroup.procs  cpu.stat  init.scope        memory.numa_stat  sys-fs-fuse-connections.mount user.slice
cgroup.stat  cpuset.cpus.effective io.pressure        memory.pressure  sys-kernel-config.mount
```

> `kubepods.slice` is the starting point and it contains multiple hierarchy

Reviewer 3: Perhaps you meant "slices" instead "hierarchy"?  The plural of "hierarchy" is "hierarchies".

Author: yes thats correct, its slices. Fixed it now

cgroup.kill  cpuset.mems    io.max        memory.swap.current
cgroup.max.depth cpuset.mems.effective   io.pressure        memory.swap.events
cgroup.max.descendants hugetlb.1GB.current   io.stat        memory.swap.high
cgroup.procs  hugetlb.1GB.events   kubepods-besteffort.slice      memory.swap.max
cgroup.stat  hugetlb.1GB.events.local  kubepods-burstable.slice      memory.zswap.current
cgroup.subtree_control hugetlb.1GB.max    kubepods-pod2b38830b_c2d6_4528_8935_b1c08511b1e3.slice  memory.zswap.max
cgroup.threads  hugetlb.1GB.numa_stat   memory.current       misc.current
cgroup.type  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.current  memory.events        misc.max
cpu.idle  hugetlb.1GB.rsvd.max   memory.events.local       pids.current
cpu.max   hugetlb.2MB.current   memory.high        pids.events
cpu.max.burst  hugetlb.2MB.events   memory.low        pids.max
cpu.pressure  hugetlb.2MB.events.local  memory.max        rdma.current
cpu.stat  hugetlb.2MB.max    memory.min        rdma.max
cpu.weight  hugetlb.2MB.numa_stat   memory.numa_stat
cpu.weight.nice  hugetlb.2MB.rsvd.current  memory.oom.group
```

Based on the QoS of the pod, either our application pod will end up in the

> above besteffort.slice or burstable.slice cgroup or kubepods.slice (Guaranteed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
above kubepods-besteffort.slice or kubepods-burstable.slice cgroup or kubepods.slice (Guaranteed
```

QoS) cgroup. The 3 QoS classes are defined
[here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-QoS/#quality-of-service-classes)

To identify the right cgroup file, we need pod UUID and container UUID from the
`pod yaml` output

```bash
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep uid
  uid: cdf7b785-4eb7-44f7-99cc-ef53890f4dfd
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i containerID
  - containerID: cri-o://77e57fbbc0f0630f41f9f154f4b5fe368b6dcf7bef7dcd75a9c4b56676f10bc9
[$]kubectl get po csi-rbd-demo-pod -oyaml |grep -i qosClass
  qosClass: BestEffort
```

> Now check in the besteffor.slice and identify the right path using pod UID and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now check kubepods-besteffort.slice and identify the right path using pod UID and
```

support. Additionally,
[VolumeAttributeClass](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-attributes-class/README.md)
is currently being developed within the Kubernetes realm and will initially be
in the Alpha stage. Consequently, it will be disabled by default.

#### Advantages of QoS using VolumeAttributeClass

1. No Restore/Clone operation is required to change the QoS
1. Easily QoS can be changed for existing PVC only with second approach not
   with third as it needs new secret.

### Hybrid Approach

Considering the advantages and drawbacks, we can use StorageClass and
VolumeAttributeClass to support QoS, with VolumeAttributeClass taking
precedence over StorageClass.

### Conclusion

The RBD QoS design aims to mitigate IO noisy neighbor issues in Ceph
deployments by providing a way to set I/O limits on devices through cgroupv2
for both krbd and rbd-nbd mapped devices. Different approaches involving
StorageClass and VolumeAttributesClass have been discussed, each with its own
advantages and drawbacks. The hybrid approach offers a flexible solution that
accounts for dynamic changes while addressing the challenges of existing

> approaches.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if this paragraph brings any value -- this is not an academic paper ;)

A sentence like "This would account for dynamic changes while ..." can be added to the "Hybrid approach" section and I would ditch the entire "Conclusion" section otherwise.

Author: Removed the Conclusion :D
